# July 22nd 2024

## Morning

- [x] Played with [this new note-taking system](./digital-home.md)

- misc thinking about what to do.
  man my brain really isn't working right now lol.
  the fact that I've been so inconsistent with anki + meditation recently is a bit concerning. part of me thinks I should ponder that.
  part of me thinks I should just get to work and do the things.
  there is gonna be a lot of work to do. I think I should just get on top of it. Usually I spend the morning doing anki/meditating, but I ended up playing with some new note-taking stuff. That's ok. It's still some form of progress. Would be nice if I could feel less conflicted about these things.

- [x] Get ready, brush teeth, wipe eye with warm towel

## Personal

## Ideaflow

### [o] Start of workday routine

- [x] set slack to active
- [x] Check [inboxes](./inbox-list.md)
  - [x] https://linear.app/ideaflow/inbox (inbox and new issues)
  - [x] things3 today/inbox
  - [x] https://github.com/notifications
  - [x] email
  - [x] slack
    - slack - ideaflow
      - messages
      - saved for later
    - slack - ideaflow user hq
- [x] Planned today using Sketch out my day #roam/templates
  - [x] Write out the top-of-mind things you think you should work on
  - [x] Pull in commitments
    - [x] Make note of events from calendar (Google Calendar)
    - [x] Review this week's intentions and bring in /create tasks
    - [x] pull in options from
    - [x] bring forward last week of todos

### Mew sync meeting

how's auth + sync going
need to make update for outline/stream structure

### Team meeting

### Jacob about ui/ux

- mention should create child not "related to"
- click to toggle and button to zoom (same as entanglement)
- Breadcrumb
  - Allows making the immediate parent visible
  - Home icon and arrow at end of line
- Hide relations to direct parent
  - should only affect parent/child relations
- Backspace after colon should put you back into raw-text with colon. see `taylor/backspace`
- "Search and replace dropdown" setting is resetting
- Make ";" drop you into the search-or-replace temporarily (even if it's not a labelled relation)
- Sort by prefix match and relations at the bottom (having node/relation header)
- All dropdowns should have the path shown (all dropdowns should be the same)
- ghost blank bullet when there is none
- edit button next to nub
- explore search interface like entanglement
- make "hide relations to direct parent" only hide unlabelled relations

#### for demo tomorrow

- global search
- persistence

### dev

- [x] write stand up
- [x] talk to jacob about ui/ux, public notes (demo version?), waitlist

## End of day
