# 2024 July 25th

- [x] Check [inboxes](./inbox-list.md)
- [x] write stand up

- [x] set slack to active

- [x] 8: Get ready, brush teeth, wipe eye with warm towel
- [x] cancell (705) 645-4520

## did write up of things to do, issues, etc

### bugs

- bug: relation types not saving (RPC)
- bug: error during login (Phil)
- bug: With 2 tabs open: When I move multiple nodes at once by pressing tab, the change happens in multiple steps in the second tab (same with delete) (Taylor/Phil)
- bug: I noticed a couple times that after leaving the tab in the background for a while, when I came back, sync wasn’t running. Maybe the setTimeout callback was cancelled? I didn’t think that was a thing.

### features

- undo (maybe RPC)
- whitelist users (Phil)
- get simple stream working again (Taylor)
  - no bundles, cmd+enter, sort by created at
  - related to removing unnecessary default nodes
- persist expansion state to local storage

### improvements / code smells

- sync resilience (RPC)

#### store life cycle

- when the user changes, we should re-instantiate everything, not just clear it out. (Taylor)

  - ```ts
    export default function Layout({ children }: { children: React.ReactNode }) {
      return (
        <!-- <AuthProvider>  // this gets logged in user, shows login page, etc -->
          <StoreProvider> // this instantiates the stores, provides store and loading state
              <App>{children}</App> // side bars, header, etc. app router controls the main content
          </StoreProvider>
        <!-- </AuthProvider> -->
      );
    }

    function StoreProvider() {
      const auth = useAuth0();
      const [graphStore, setGraphStore] = useState();
      const [settingStore, setSettingStore] = useState();
      useEffect(() => {
          const graphStore = new GraphStore(auth.user)
          setGraphStore(graphStore)
          return () => {
              graphStore.clear() // clears data, stops sync, etc
          }
      })
      return <StoreContext.Provider values={graphStore, user: auth.user} />
    }
    ```

  - the loadGraphData should be part of DataProvider

- cancel the sync interval when user is switched (RPC)
  - put startSync on the sync queue. add stopSyncing too. include this in the `clear` clean up method

#### auth

- we get/create the user inside every component that calls useAuth. Instead, this should be done once in our custom provider. probably do the get in the same initial pull. like getUserData can create the user if it doesn't exist, plus return data (maybe even defaults)

- use nextjs middleware for auth https://github.com/IdeaFlowCo/thoughtstream-web/blob/develop/server/src/middlewares/auth-middleware.ts
- we shouldn't need to provide the user id with request. we already have it in the token

#### data model

- [x] make it so it's not possible for a node to exist but not the corresponding relation lists (e.g. by denormalizing: make it a real property of the node) (maybe it's not even it's own class, just an object. easier to do once fractional position is just a string)
- We don't actually need the outline node, stream node, or relations b/w them and the user. We don't need default relation types either. The only thing we need is "unlabelled relation" which we can represent with a null relation type on the relation.
- make settings just an object and add it to the graph store
- we don't even need the view store tbh. pretty much the only thing it does is wrap the mainOutlineTree. (I get separation of concerns, but having all state in one store makes cleanup/teardown easier)

### misc

- when editing a node, don't show relations to/from that node in the search-and-replace dropdown
- rip out /persist and saving to localstorage
- loading state is kinda funky when auth enabled. like we don't have a loading page
- performance stuff
- pusher plan
- typecheck api with zod

- [x] clean up instantiation of stores + auth hooks
- [x] move sprint planning and team meetings
