Misc thoughts while reviewing Phil's the positioned list PR

send to #eng my notes re having needing a consistent opinion on whether GraphStore is our interface or mutating objects is ok 
(see comment from me where we didn't expose any update method and just past it to the graph store)
(or make them "semi private" with an underscore or something and we just shouldn't use those)

should the `update` function's responsibility be to *only* update properties on that object? Or should it also be responsible for updating objects elsewhere (e.g. relation lists when you change a from/to prop). Whatever we decide, we should be consistent.

Like there will always be operations that take you temporarily into an invalid state. You update an id _here_ and then you update if _there_ and once both are done you're consistent. It should be obvious to us which function guarantee we're in a consistent   

We could do something like prefixed methods like `_update` aren't guaranteed to be safe. These can be used by the store when it's composing a larger change, but shouldn't be used by features. For features, they should only use methods that take you from one consistent state to the next.

Hmm... and actually, those things which take you from one consistent state to the next should also generate a transaction so it's undoable. 


Directions
- Show that when our models generate updates, it makes our lives easier
- Put the graph inside fractional positioned list
- Make fractional positioned list way less fancy

Options:
- Flux architecture? There's one central store and it's responsible for all state updates. I see us edging towards this but it's not clear to me whether that's intentional or wanted. The way we've set things up so far, I think that's the only way you *can* cause it owns the update manager. A pro for this is everything about the state is in one place. A con for this is that all the state update logic is in one place! You can't do what we've done with the tree where implementation details of state updates are defined within the tree itself. 


