

Often with thoughtstream the way we'd decide what to work on was "whatever was top of mind for jacob on sprint planning day"
I strongly believe that this method of making progress isn't gonna work.
A lot of what I've been trying to do with mew is understand where Jacob is trying to go so I can be the one to set short term road maps in that direction.
That's what motivated the vision doc.
That's what motivated the Mew 0.0.3 doc.
That's what motivated the product meetings.
The reason I'm frustrated is that it's *not working*. Despite the effort I've put in, we still end up in a situation where Jacob is dispatching requests and frustrations he flags as very important, but which don't accord which any longer term plan we can see.

This means I can't do my job of helping you move towards your goals. If I can't model what jacobs wants, or what the company is aiming at, then I can't help decide what's important. And it's important that I do! Cause whatever is top of mind for jacob is not a coherent plan of action.

When I try to engage on discussion about this, it just doesn't go anywhere. Many of the product discussions were me trying to find what it was we were trying to do, or keep the discussion on a track based on what I thought we were trying to do. It was a common experience that jacob would want to persue a line of thinking which didn't make any sense to me, he couldn't explain why it makes sense, but he would shut down unless we pursued it. He might say something like "ok just let me explain and then you'll see". It's don't think there's ever been the case where after one of these tangents I could see how this fit into what we were doing or why.

You might say "but I was just exploring while engineering was 'getting things over the line'". I'd say two things to that: 1) they don't know where that line is in your head and 2) whenever I work with you to specify it, expecting it's just bugs and ux we're missing, new feature requests come in. So there's an invisible line the engineers can't see, which they're always missing, and the only way they know they're not there is because when you say we're not there, you give a few more things to do.   

^ This is the same mode I said at the top. We're working by whatever is top of mind for you at the start of each sprint. We're not in a position where we can work smart and help navigate things. We're stuck in a feedback loop where decision making is both inscrutible and also not caching out in progress.   