

planning the week?
- ring fitted (and ordered?)






maybe no social media? no scrolling in general. feels like I've been reaching for it more often in recent months



get back into weekly reviews and plans




Maybe start thinking about next job soon? I'm pretty sure I'll be leaving ideaflow in November

---

Keep meditating. 
I want this to become the *main* thing I'm doing. Not, like, the main side-project I'm doing, but the *main* thing. If I *actually* get into this frame, then if I'm conflicted it should be centered around not making progress around internal work, as opposed the usual where it's centered around work. 


I think one way of helping with this is to keep the time and energy spent on work capped. Like just do 40 hours per week, and don't engage with thoughts about it outside of those 40 hours. As I write this, there's a part of me that feels this is wrong. It feels like this is "giving up" or "not the way". It believes that progress is made by fully committing to things, and doing a half-assed job is a waste of time. Yes yes yes!! This is true! But now flip it around. It's just as true about meditation and internal work. The question is: which is more important right now? Or another way: which do I want to say is primary right now?  

Another way to think about this: Even if I think that I want to do great work, and that I'm ok with other parts of my life suffering as a result, whatever I'm doing right now isn't working. It's not like I'm fully engaged and doing the best work of my life. It's silly to keep whipping myself to stay on the path when it's pretty clear I'm not on the path.

I liked playing with and thinking about my little note-taking system. Day9 said he needs "fiddly projects". It doesn't even matter what they are or achieve, they don't need instrumental value, it's the process of fiddling with them that provides intrinsic value. I think this is true for me. I've seen this in myself before and noted it down. The days where playing with some ideas and musing on them in the shower are ones I enjoy.    

---

I just made a note that I need to "get my gtd system back in order" e.g. weekly reviewing and planning. This seems like a fine way to bootstrap my way back into personal productivity, but isn't the main issue imo. I think the main issue is a lack of energy and motivation. I'm either burnt out or just expending all my weekly energy on professional work. So when I get done with that, all I want to do is sink into the couch and scroll. Ideally my mind would be popping with ideas to explore or things to do, and I'd be energized to do them, and then I would productively pursue them. If this was the case, the weekly plan is less important. 

With that said, I think there are some things I _would_ like to get ahead of which I don't think I would unless I plan accordingly e.g. proposal / engagement. Thinking about it makes me a little stressed / overwhelmed so I don't think I'd naturally start doing