# Tue Aug 20 2024

# Done

- Morning routine
  - [x] Apply heated eyepatch
  - [x] Make coffee
  - [x] Anki (10 min)

# Now

Updates for Jacob

- He _wants_ everything to have a canonical location. The workflowy behaviour where the breadcrumbs show you the traversal path confuses him. So every _is_ hierarchichal. It's just like Notion. Something can exist in multiple places, but one of those is the primary one.
- He didn't understand what I'd presented on Friday at all. It was a complete update for him that was I was describing was the same as Linear views. He didn't know how linear views worked.

He likes the idea of saved queries
He agrees that for some queries, it's awkward to express in terms of sublists.

What Jacob wants the "stream view" to be: You show all the descendants of some node as flat. You can manually re-order those nodes.

- (How could that be though? cause things which point too a node are considered "children" of it)
- I think that's what sub-lists are about, but then we there's an assymetry between the "stream" of a user and the "stream" of a node
- Maybe we respect the directionality of the relations when generating the stream?

- Maybe the "canonical relation" is what solves this? You only recurse thought "children", in the sense of the nodes whose canonical relation is w.r.t the current node.
- Maybe that's not actually what he wants? Maybe there's a diff between "the stream of everything belonging to the current account" and "the 'stream' of the current node".

/
Users/
Taylor/ - workspaces:
Jacob/ - workspaces:
Organizations/
Google Org/
Ideaflow Org/
workspaces/
mew-workspace/
ts-workspace/
ios-workspace/
mew-workspace/
users/ - Taylor - Jacob

The account is where the billing happens. There's at least 1 workspace with each account.
Workspaces can be nested
A user can be added to an account and 1 or more workspaces  
The user has permission to see anything in a workspace (or the sub-workspaces)
Everything in an account is owned by that account
An item created within a workspace belongs to that workspace (it can belong to others as well, but one is primary)
You can get a flat list of all the content

# Later

    - [ ] Choose: monday personal weekly planning, top of mind personal work, journal / sit quietly
    - [ ] Meditate
