# July 23rd 2024

## Morning routine

on [](./relax-happy-achieve.md):
Remember, this means achieving less in the short term and being ok with it.
Failing more at the "real" work while focusing efforts on relaxing and being happy.
This isn't giving up on achieving though, or some kind of nialism. The word achieve is in the name!
It's claim is that this is both a path towards a good life _and_ one of achievement. You don't have to give up one to get the other.
It's also a counter-point to the default strategy of going in the reverse order. It claims that going in reverse doesn't work.
A fear of failure is definitely part of what compells me to work so much. Or a fear of underperforming some level that I feel I _should_ be at.

## Ideaflow

[x] Start of workday routine

### Stuff found while investigating sync

#### Sync

- Relation types aren't saving
  - bug: create new node through @ mention and the relation type b/w the new node and current one shows up differently on second tab (consequence of the above I suspect)
- Pinned section isn’t syncing to second window. And disappears after refresh
- When I move multiple nodes at once in one tab by tabbing, the change happens in multiple steps in the second (same with delete)

#### Search and replace current node

- With the "Search and replace dropdown: All" feature enabled, you get a dropdown whenever you type. If you try to select anything from it the current node disappears (instead of replacing the current node with the selected one)
- After triggering the dropdown and then closing by pressing escape, arrow key navigation stops working

#### Misc

- Zooming into nodes by clicking on the bullets isn’t working. (Although press cmd+. _is_ working)
- Getting a selection warning in console on every tab (also backspace)
- It used to be that if you backspaced next to a pill, it would convert to text. that doesn't work anymore

#### Remaining work

- Undo

### Fixing stuff with sync

[x] taylor/fix-escape-then-arrow

- see other stuff in slack

## Personal

[x] book golf
[x] tell friends about bday
