should be working on ai focused companies?
from a career perspective, it does make sense to me to be on the forefront of this.
But one of my [job requirements](./next-job-requirements-2024.md) is "Without being crazy at work". Can you actually get that at companies that are at the forefront of AI?

Part of me feels like I'm limited in some way.
I put on a questionnaire that my greatest fear was a "life unlived".
Sometimes I feels like I'm floating through life.

A part of me feels the answer is "being a man in the arena". Take my career seriously. Try to do something real with it.
Another part feels that's the wrong direction. What I really need is the stability and space afforded by an established company. From that place of stability I can grow personally and professionaly. The theory here is something like: At my current and previous jobs, my work took up so much of my time and energy that I didn't have the space for anything else.
^ some dimensions of growth: 
- being more "online" and engaging with communities. I have some mental block around this and/or need to get over some activation energy, but I've never really done it. I started a bit while on sabbatical, but haven't since. 
- [relax-happy-achieve](./relax-happy-achieve.md): Take meditation and meditation / emotional processing seriously. I bet there's lots of room to level up here. I have an inkling that pushing this frontier is _both_ the best way to make progress on well-being _and_ my effectiveness in work. I kinda feel like I'm operating in tangles all the time, and untangling that would do way more than e.g. finding the "right" job   

Where I land after the above: It's a nice-to-have for the company to be taking LLMs seriously, but it's not required. The balanced work-life is more important. 