# Conversation with Seif 2024-11-11

An informational interview with [Seif Ghazi](./Seif-Ghazi.md) about working at Shopify.

- Biggest pros/cons of working there?
pro: people really care about the work. deep care for craft. people are world class. team is great.
pro: tendency to move quick. not a start up though. not a lot of red tape.
pro: people's performance is actually measured. they're let go if they're not doing well.
con: depends on the team. new manager isn't so great.
con: fully remote is pro and con. harder to build connections with people. 1 offsite per year. older people. 
con: ceo is very pragmatic. he'll drop things if they're not working.
con: had a few layoffs previously.

- What's the work/life balance like?
on call is a serious thing.
once every couple of weeks you're on call. 9-5 including weekends.

- My understanding is that they're primarily a Ruby on Rails shop. My web experience is mostly React/Typescript. Is that used at all? and/or do they care?
some react/typescript
seif uses java and scala

- What was the hiring process like for you? Any tips?
6 rounds of interviews
system design, pair programming, behavioral
not a lot of leet code stuff

month and a half
- screen
- pair programming
- hr behavioural
- supposed to be another pair programming
- 3 more system design
- technical deep dive
- technical problem solving. coding challenge

C
- What are some cool projects you've worked on or heard about?

- Pay?
$120-150k

- What's the career path like?
you need to 

- Is there a reference system?
