Notes from Kevin Lacroix:

# Turn Towards or Anchor Away

With any experience or sensory challenge, we basically have 2 options: Turn towards it or Anchor Away from it. It can be helpful to be very intentional about these in working with sensory challenges!


Unpleasant sensory challenge (eg:anxiety) - some (not all) options
Anchor Away
Anchor out (SHF Out, any channel or combo)
Focusing on external, the internal may settle
Fully allow the internal with background equanimity 
BG Equanimity with whatever is outside of our focus range
Cool Down (Feel Rest)
Focusing on part of b ody where we don’t feel anxiety
Intentionally relax muscles (focus on rest that creates)
Find neutral places in the body!
Keep in mind, and we open up to rest, we drop our resistance, the anxiety may actually intensify and spread. But if it spreads - and you’re able to ride that wave - it’s likely to dissipate, allowing a deeper drop into rest on the other side 
Nurture Positive (SHF Good)
We might be able to override negative thoughts and feelings by focusing on positive ones
Eg: gratitude: might suffuse and permeate the anxiety and break it up into how, allowing it to dissipate.
Go with Flow
Detect flow in other aspects of experience (breath?)
Flow is generally pleasant, so focusing on it might provide relief


Turn toward
SHF: Deconstruct it to make it manageable
Work with individual parts
The physical sensation - does it have a size, shape, texture, is it changing, etc
Separate the SHF
Notice the thoughts that trigger or are triggered by it
Untangle and be free
Ride the Flow
Detect fluidity/impermanence/movement in the sensations (feelings, thoughts) of anxiety itself
Focus on the movement - ride the waves
When we experience it as a flow of energy, it might feel less problematic, more peaceful…
Relief in ‘this is passing’
Alternate turning toward and away.


Pleasant sensory challnege doing SHF and you detect compelling pleasant Flow in the body
Turn toward
Feel Good? Feel Flow? See Hear Feel? Whatever the interest and opportunity!
Investigate it more completely with CC&E
Anchor Away
In Daily Life - if we are at work, for example, it might not be skillful or appropriate to turn towards a pleasant experience! Instead, we can:
Let it be in the BG with EQ!! 
Enjoy it in the background while you focus on whatever you need to focus on in the foreground!
