# Some notes taken while following links in chatgpt's report on tanha. 

https://www.greaterwrong.com/posts/r6kzvdia4S8TKE6WF/from-self-to-craving-three-characteristics-series?comments=false&hide-nav-bars=true
craving -> error signal
error signal is subjectively experienced as unsatisfactory (suffering?)

https://opentheory.net/2023/07/principles-of-vasocomputation-a-unification-of-buddhist-phenomenology-active-inference-and-physical-reflex-part-i/#:~:text=%28personal%20discussion%29,having%20a%20satisfying%20meditation%20practice

> The Buddha called these ‘micro-motions’ of greed and aversion taṇhā, and the Buddhist consensus seems to be that it accounts for an amazingly large proportion (~90%) of suffering.

Tanha is "unskillful active inference". It's not a claim that active inference is bad. It's a claim that we often do active inference in contexts that are both unproductive and result in more suffering than other contexts. It's also a claim that this is a skill. It's like our active inference system is miscalibrated. Through training, we can learn to do active inference in more skillful ways, which both increases our effectiveness and reduces suffering.

Tanha isn't pointing at all active inference as saying "that's bad". It's pointing specifically at the obviously stupid and unnecessary ones and says "that's bad". 

["Why Zebras Don't Get Ulcers: Stress and Health" by Dr. Robert Sapolsky - YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D9H9qTdserM&ab_channel=BeckmanInstituteatIllinois)



> I propose reframing tanha as an artifact of the brain’s compression pressure. I.e. tanha is an artifact of a continual process that subtly but systematically pushes on the complexity of ‘what is’ [...] to collapse it into a more simple configuration, and sometimes holds it there until we act to make that simplification true. The result of this compression drive conflates “what is”, “what could be”, “what should be”, and “what will be,” and this conflation is the source of no end of moral and epistemological confusion.
> 
> This reframes tanha as both the pressure which collapses complexity into simplicity, and the ongoing stress that comes from maintaining the counterfactual aspects of this collapse (compression stress). We can think of this process as balancing two costs: on one hand, applying compression pressure has metabolic and epistemic costs, both immediate and ongoing. On the other hand, the brain is a finite system and if it doesn’t continually “compress away” patterns there will be unmanageable sensory chaos. The right amount of compression pressure is not zero.